It is commonly remembered that a request to stir a cryogenic oxygen tank with a fan caused a short in the wiring, literally sparking a fire that quickly developed into an explosion. This is really all the knowledge required to understand the proceedings of the audio here. But we will dig a little bit into the details here for those who are curious for more.

{{figure:o2-tank}}

The cryogenic tank in question was actually originally slated for Apollo 10. It is generally known that the tank was dropped (about a distance of 5cm/2in), but this was only one step in a long chain of misfortunes that led to the accident. The tank was pulled from Apollo 10 and shelved as result of the drop, but it seemed to work properly and so it was installed on Apollo 13.

However, it was then discovered during a pre-flight check about a month before launch that the tank wouldn't drain quite properly due to the drop. This wasn't really a problem for flight, during which the drain was not used, and the technicians proposed to simply boil the undrained oxygen off with the heaters built into the tank. Commander Lovell was asked to okay this procedure, and nobody involved had a problem with it (particularly as replacement would have delayed launch by around a month), and so the operation proceeded.

But the heater was designed to operate off the 28 volt on-board power supplied by the spacecraft, whereas the launchpad systems supplied 65 volt power. The latter was a change made during Apollo's development, and all involved manufacturers were told to ensure either voltage worked, but the tank manufacturer literally didn't get the memo. So while the heaters ran, the overvoltage cooked all the electrical components, including the safety switches that would normally shut the heater off to keep the tank within safe temperatures. Thus, instead of the 27&deg;C (80&deg;F) maximum temperature, the tanks reached a blistering 500&deg;C (1,000&deg;F). This excessive temperature warped and cracked the Teflon insulation protecting the wiring inside the tank.

The timing of the explosion was also an unhappy accident. The tanks' depletion was measured with pressure and temperature sensors, but the slurry-like cryogenic gas within the tank would stratify over time, requiring a stir to redistribute the contents evenly again for measurement. This was typically done in the astronauts' morning, after their sleep period. Unfortunately, the sensors in tank 2 had proven faulty and possibly unreliable. Not fully trusting them, the flight controllers requested an extra measurement before bed, primarily to measure the tank 1 depletion as a way of judging tank 2's state. This meant that it was a harried, tired crew of astronauts that had to deal with the aftermath, instead of a just-rested trio fresh from sleep.

When the fateful call came and the spark was ignited, the equivalent force of 7 pounds of TNT blasts out of the tank and through the Service Module, sending the craft spinning, damaging many unrelated but proximate components, and jarring many valves closed that had been open. It was this very last fact that would later clue Kranz into the severity of the problem.

